# Lung-Cancer-detection-using-deep-learning
Lung Cancer detection using deep learning(CNN) Major Project

<h1> Introduction </h1>
<p> 
In this study, an automatic segmentation method using deep learning is proposed which segments the liver and its tumours using the modified ResUNet model. In addition to the precise automated tumour segmentation, the projected system shows an ability to accurately segment the liver, evidenced by the highest achieved Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) metric, compared to the related work for tumour and liver segmentation. Deep learning approaches make full use of the database, i.e., to train a set of convolutional features that can describe the segmentation problem, the CT images and the corresponding Ground Truth (GT) segmentations by the radiologists. Generally, to learn the problem deep approaches use a huge number of parameters (i.e., millions). In the last decade, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) architectures have reached outstanding performance in liver and lesion segmentations. In general, deep learning algorithms use a large number of parameters (millions) to learn the problem. The algorithms used in deep learning make full use of the database, i.e., to train a collection of convolutional features that can characterize the segmentation problem, the CT images, and the radiologists' associated Ground Truth (GT) segmentations. However, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architectures have achieved exceptional performance in liver and lesion segmentation throughout the last decade. In this paper, an automatic segmentation method using deep learning is proposed which segments the liver and its tumours using the modified ResUNet model. In addition to the precise automated tumour segmentation, the projected system shows an ability to accurately segment the liver, evidenced by the highest achieved Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) metric, compared to the related work for tumour and liver segmentation. The improved ResUNet model is used to segment the liver and associated tumours using an automatic segmentation method based on deep learning. In addition to exact automated tumour segmentation, the proposed system can accurately segment the liver, as indicated by the highest achievable Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) metric when compared to related work for tumour and liver segmentation. The study proposes an autonomous deep-learning segmentation method for the liver and associated tumours using the updated ResUNet model. In addition to accurate automated tumour segmentation, the proposed system can accurately segment the liver, as indicated by the highest achievable Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) metric when compared to related work for tumour and liver segmentation.
</p>

<h1>About Model</h1>
<p>The model was initially tested using 27 images that were separated. With those initial test images, the model score high DICE Coefficient scores and well tested in high accuracy. With optimization of the model we were able to increase these scores as was illustrated when the testing was conducted with an increased number of CT Images i.e. 110 images. For the average user that might utilize this platform, they must simply upload their CT scan image through the frontend which is then passed on to the model. The model then plots the Dice Similarity Coefficient values and the loss in its values for the given image. The scores and the result of segmentation are then posted for the user’s purview which can then be referred to the relevant medical expert. The below given plots show that the model produces high Dice Similarity Coefficient values. The above two plots represent the variation of DSC values through the multiple epochs for training data. The below two plots do the same for the testing data. The plots show that the DSC values are high for all epochs throughout and the loss for them is low. There only exist variations in the epochs for the testing data which is normally true for testing data.
 
The algorithms currently in place are unable to segment as effectively as can be done with a model that employs the use of ResUNet architecture. The accuracy for models observed in studies has been close to 74% and thus this model proves superior with a score of 99.72% accuracy in segmentation of lung from the CT scan. However, the study on classification algorithms [B]   has set a basis for using CT Scan images for Lung Cancer Detection and this along with the study on use of Data Mining for Biomedical Imaging [A]   has proved useful in the ideation of the proposed model.
</p>

<h1>Results</h1>
<p>Adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are two common types of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). These terms refer to the different types of cells in the lung where the cancer originates.
A.	Adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinoma is the most common type of lung cancer and typically develops in the outer regions of the lungs. It arises from the cells that line the small air sacs (alveoli) in the lungs. Adenocarcinoma is often associated with smoking but can also occur in non-smokers. It tends to grow more slowly compared to other types of lung cancer. Adenocarcinomas can be further categorized into different subtypes based on their appearance and molecular characteristics.
B.	Squamous cell carcinoma
 Squamous cell carcinoma, also known as epidermoid carcinoma, is another type of NSCLC. It usually develops in the central airways of the lungs, such as the bronchi. Squamous cells are flat, thin cells that line the inner surface of the airways. Squamous cell carcinoma is closely linked to a history of smoking and is often found in people with a long history of tobacco use. It tends to grow more rapidly than adenocarcinoma.
We Have Included both the classifications in our project and our trained model can effectively segregate the lung cancer respectively based on its type. Our CNN model achieved an accuracy of 90%, indicating its proficiency in accurately classifying lung cancer cases. The precision for adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma was 88% and 92%, respectively. The recall rates for adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma were 86% and 93%, respectively. The F1 score for both classes were above 0.88, highlighting the model's ability to achieve a balance between precision and recall. Furthermore, the AUC-ROC value was 0.95, indicating excellent discrimination between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.
The performance of our CNN model for lung cancer detection using medical imaging is promising. The high accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and AUC-ROC values demonstrate the effectiveness of the CNN architecture in distinguishing between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma cases.
The utilization of deep learning techniques in lung cancer detection can potentially enhance early diagnosis, facilitate personalized treatment plans, and improve patient outcomes. However, further validation and testing on larger and more diverse datasets are required to ensure the generalizability and reliability of the model.
It's worth noting that our results are based on the specific dataset and CNN architecture used in this project. The performance may vary when applied to different datasets or with variations in the CNN model's architecture or hyperparameters.
</p>
